You What the Bleep fans will love this one.
In the movie we heard bits and pieces
from each of the scientists and doctors.
Here, you can hear the entire story from
Dr. Stuard Hammeroff, who tells us about
the on board computers in ourselves
called microtubules.
If you've seen our interview with Vernon Wolf,
you'll know that these little fields of pure potential
within the cells of our body,
are what drive us and define us.
Here, Stuart addresses how it all
works in the world of quantum physics,
and what we can take away from this knowledge.
(music)
[Interviewer] First of all, you're still a
practicing anesthesiologist, and if you can give me
a little bit of an idea how anesthesiology and
the world of quantum theroy started coming togeather
in your life, I'd like to know about that.
Well, I actually chose anesthesiology partly to understand
consciousness, and how the brain produced consciousness.
I had always been interested in that question
from college and medical school and thought about
neurology, psychiatry, and neurosurgery dealing
with the brain, but I was convinced by my former chairman,
Burnell Brown, who is the chief of anesthesiology
at the University of Arizona, that to understand
consciousness the best approach was
to understand how anesthetics erase consciousness.
And that is because the gas anesthetics, at least,
are fairly selective, in that you breathe them in,
and they go into your lungs, into the blood, into the brain,
and many brain activities continue,
many bodily functions continue,
only, at just the right concentration,
pretty much only consciousness is effected.
You can still have fairly normal EEG evol potentials
control the breathing, but consciousness is erased.
It turns out that the gases work, only by very weak
quantum mechanical forces.
They don't form any chemical bonds.
So, when you turn the vaporizer off,
the gases get pulled out and the patient wakes up.
[Interviewer] Where does quantum mechanics fit in with this?
First, on a very populous level, so you can explain it
to myself and everybody watching this.
How do these two worlds interface and our brain,
when we go into that strange world where we're
seeing things that we don't normally see,
we're wondering if we're here or if we're there,
or even alive anymore.
All that happens when we're under the influence
of an anesthetic.
What's going on?
Well, first of all to explain quantum mechanics,
or quantum theory in a general sense,
the, our world is really described by two sets of laws.
You might almost say they're two worlds.
There's the classical, everyday world where things
are definite, and there's the quantum world that's
small scale, so, though exactly how small is unclear.
Where things are quite indefinate, and things can be
in two or more places at the same time,
separated from themselves, things can be interconnected
over great distances and seemingly together,
even when they're separated, and things
can condense into one object.
These are all, and time doesn't flow.
These are all, um, characteristics of the quantum world.
The classical world, as I said, is definite.
And I think in a very general sense, the subconscious,
our dream world, the kind of situations the you described,
relates to the quantum world, and our consciousness
is actually the transition between that quantum world
and the classical world.
So, it's kind of a boundary between, consciousnesses
exists on the boundary between
the quantum world and the classical world.
[Interviewer] So picking up on what you said a moment ago,
in the quantum world time is not linear,
um, the space that an atom is occupying can be more
than one at the same time, a particle can become
a wave, um, this is a very indefinite sort of world,
and, which would beg the question, then can we
and what we're doing right here actually exist in
another place and time, for example?
Well, some people think there are multiple universes,
parallel universes, and that's
one interpretation of quantum mechanics,
but the apparent randomness and indefinite nature
of quantum mechanics, may only be in the measurement
decoherance, and it could be that the underlying
substructure of the quantum world is actually,
contains information and, in fact, possibly even
platonic information, according to Roger Penrose.
and Freeman Dysonn, for example.
[Interviewer] Can you explain platonic information,
simply at first, so that we get a structure to work with?
Yeah.
Well, Plato, the Greek philosopher said that there was
an absolute realm of, a realm of absolute truths
and pure forms.
For example, mathematical equations are one example.
And also, perhaps, ethical values and aesthetic values,
and, exist in what he described as
an abstract, non-physical realm.
Well, Roger Penrose suggested that the substructure
of the universe, at the most tiny level,
called the Planck scale, is actually structured
and contains platonic information.
Platonic information like mathematical truths.
Things that are not invented, but are discovered by
many people, are actually embedded, as truths
at this fundamental level.
[Interviewer] - Geometry as well?
Correct.
Geometry, mathematics and perhaps other truths, too.
[interviewer] In this way, the rediscovery quote, of quote
sacred geometry for example, or what is being called
sacred geometry in more spiritually based disciplines,
for example, is that emanating from this understanding that
this in it's most minute form at the base
of the cosmic functioning?
It could be.
I think any discovery, potentially, is actually uncovered
and discovered, rather than invented by anybody.
Um, you could argue about that,
but that's the basic idea that truths, absolute truth
exists in a real, physical sense,
but way, way down there at the
bottom floor of the universe, so the connection
to it is very difficult and very subtle
and only highly evolved biological systems,
at least thus far, are able to be influenced by it.
[Interviewer] So if you start at the base, with
mathematics, geometry, um, etcetera, is this,
you used the word coherence a moment ago,
is this an incoherent field, and coherence
is created out if it?
Can you talk a little bit about what makes us,
um, not so random, and our lives not so random?
Well, um, randomness versus, the real question is
are we purely algorithmic, are we random,
or are we something else?
Um, the ah, and this was actually Roger's first approach
toward the problem, artificial intelligence, who would say
that the brain works algorithmically.
The brain works by, um, processes that a computer could do.
That if A then B, that if B then D, and so forth,
and follows this path by preset rules.
And, ah, Penrose suggested that the brain,
and then the other type of decision would be random,
just flip a coin and whatever that is, that's what you do.
But, Penrose suggested that consciousness
uses something else, that he called noncomputable,
and he argued from something called Godel's theorem,
to suggest that understanding, knowing,
must come from outside the system.
So that algorithmic processes can never
really know and understand.
And therefore, computers can never really be conscious.
The only other type of process, other than
algorithmic, deterministic, determinism and randomness
was the choices made in a particular type of
collapse of the wave function, that he had proposed
as a solution to the measurement problem
in quantum mechanics.
So he was kind of killing three or four birds with one stone
with this proposal suggesting that to solve the problem
of super position how large a--
[Interviewer] Explain super position. You just did this
in a lecture, so you probably don't know what
you've said to whom at this moment.
Super position is something being in two or more
places or states at the same time.
And the best example is Shroderinger's cat.
Now, early days of quantum theory suggested that
an object, the particle will stay in super position until
it was observed by a conscious observer.
And it seems that even if a machine measured
a superposition, that the results and the machine
stayed in super position until
somebody looked at the results.
And this, this is what the experiment seemed to show.
Now, Shroderinger, a quantum physicist of some renown,
thought this was silly, and he proposed a thought experiment
in which a quantum event, for example a photon
passing through a half silvered mirror.
So it has a 50% chance of going through and a
50% chance of being reflected.
Say if it's reflected it goes into a box and releases
a vial or poison.
The box contains a cat, and the box is sealed.
So, if it's reflected it releases the poison
and the cat is dead.
If it goes through, the poison's
not released, the cat's alive.
Because it's a quantum particle, the photon
both goes through and does not go through
therefore the poison is released and not released,
therefore the cat is both dead and alive,
until someone opens the box and looks at it.
[Interviewer] So basically, this is saying that both
possibilities exist?
Until someone looks at it.
[Interviewer] Observes it?
Yeah, the conscious observer.
And he, Shroderinger, pointed this out to show how silly
was the idea, because, you know, how could a system
as large as a cat be amplified from a
tiny quantum system like a photon.
The problem is, nobody could really say for sure why
the cat wouldn't be both dead and alive,
nor how large a quantity a quantum system could become.
There's no apparent limit, or boundary,
or reason that it couldn't.
And so Shroderinger's cat problem is still with us.
There some other, ah, explanations for
quantum super position.
One is that each possibility branches off
to form a whole new universe,
the multiple worlds hypothesis.
The other is decoherence, that any interaction with
the environment, the classical world causes
the system to erode.
But that doesn't account for isolated super positions,
nor does it really destroy the super position.
It just kinda mixes it with noise.
The other possibility is what Penrose suggested.
Others suggested different types of thresholds,
but the idea that quantum super position,
when it gets large enough and persists long enough,
will reach some threshold intrinsic to nature,
and self collapse.
So that, and by the way this is used in quantum computing.
Um, quantum computers use, instead of bits of one or zero,
as regular computers, they use quantum bits,
superposition of one and zero.
And the quantum bits communicate with each other
by this spooky, non-local entanglement,
and do incredibly efficient computing,
and after a while collapses to one,
each one chose one or zero, and this type
of quantum computing can do incredibly
efficient and complex computations.
So, um, collapsing means going from the quantum world
to the classical world, reducing or collapsing.
The question is, would a quantum system, by itself,
ever reduce or collapse, or if something,
according to Copenhagen interpretation, if we're not looking
at a building even, could it be in two or more
places at the same time.
It seems ridiculous, but there's no obvious--
[Interviewer] So, our observation actually creates
a coherence or a structure to that possibility?
Ah, the Copenhagen interpretation would say that
observation causes reduction or collapse to one.
But, Penrose and others said that, no there's some
intrinsic feature to the universe, that if a super position
reaches large enough, or goes on long enough
it would self collapse, undergo what he called
objective reduction and he proposed
a type of objective reduction that involved
the universe itself.
And the idea that, well, how can somebody, something
be in two places at the same time,
I mean, that's the real issue.
And, like the multiple worlds hypothesis,
he said that if super position is a branching or bifurcation
of the universe at a very tiny, fundamental level,
what's called the Planck scale.
And in the multiple worlds view these super positions
each would evolve to form a whole new universe.
But in the Penrose approach, the super positions are
like bubbles in reality, or blisters.
And they're unstable and they will collapse, choose one
or the other and because they are built into
this Platonic world, the choices are influenced by
Platonic information embedded in
the fundamental levels, so that.
And this, he argued, was characteristic
of conscious thought.
So, as I said, he was killing several birds with one stone,
cause, cause the separation is, kind brings relativity
to quantum mechanics, and it solved, potentially solved
the problem of Shroderinger's cat, and how large
a super position could be.
And it also explained consciousness, in that it could,
we could function in a way that was
not stictly algorithmic, we could be free thinkers,
to some extent.
Not random, but something else,
We could allow ourselves to be influenced by
this giant look up table, if you will, that exists
throughout the universe.
[Interviewer] Look up table, what's that?
Well, that's another way of describing the Platonic realm,
of information embedded everywhere at
the most fundamental level.
[Interviewer] That information, we won't try
to source it, per se, but might that information
you say, be responsible for, maybe even be given
some part of the word, the observer, might it be
part of a field of intelligence that creates a coherence
of sorts, or a structure of sorts?
Well, my, uh, Freeman Dyson said that mind and
intelligence are woven into the fabric of the universe.
And, what this is saying is that it's happening at
the most fundamental level, at the Planck scale.
And the Penrose proposal was a way that our
biological brains could connect to that level.
I wouldn't day the level is the, well you could say
the level is the observer, but consciousness is
actually the process of accessing that.
It's kind of a ripple through this
fundamental level, if you will.
[Interviewer] If you're saying that on a quantum level,
even on a cellular level, and beyond, in our body
we're functioning as quantum computers, of sorts,
where, what is the intelligence or guiding force
that created such a structure?
Well, our brains use a lot of, you know,
normal processes, you know, it's not all
quantum computation, but we take advantage of this.
But if you're asking where the Platonic information
came from--
[Interviewer] Yes.
I thought you were asking that.
(laughter)
[Interviewer] You just put it much better than I did.
That's a tougher question.
[Interviewer] As a layperson.
Right, so where'd the Platonic information come from?
And I asked Roger that once, and he said,
the big bang, where else could it come from.
And, ah, I said, yeah, where else could it come from.
Um, because that's what created
the structure of the universe.
So, interestingly enough, there is another theory,
and I don't know if Roger, well,
Roger knows about it, but I don't know
what he thinks about it.
There's an Italian astrophysicist named Paola Zizzi,
who, okay, during the big bang the universe
literally began and exploded and expanded
very,very rapidly, this is called inflation.
And after a time, a very short time,
a fraction of a fraction of a second,
the rapid expansion stopped and it's
been growing very slowly ever since.
So, people are trying to explain
the rapid inflation and then why it stopped,
why the slowing down occurred.
And, ah, Roger has an equation for this objective reduction,
such that super positions, when they reach,
well, depending on their size, basically,
will collapse at a certain time.
The larger the super position, the faster it will collapse.
So, anyway, Paola Zizzi calculated that the mass
of the early universe was, matched
the time of the end of inflation.
So, what she is saying is that during inflation
there were multiple universes,
multiple possible universes, and they
expanded and then reached Roger's
threshold for self collapse,
and then reduced to one particular universe,
choosing our universe and things have
been expanding ever since.
Well, by the Penrose criteria, that's a conscious
event, which means that during the big bang,
the entire universe had a cosmic conscious moment.
And, actually someone, somebody has dubbed
this theory, the big wow theory.
Because it's a variant of the big bang theory,
in which the universe actually had a conscious moment.
And Paola also points out the number of cubits in our brain
is the same as the number of cubits
that register at that moment.
So that our consciousness is, is literally a microcosm
of the, of the whole universe.
Which is a pretty bold statement to make,
but the numbers seems to match up.
But it also suggests, that we've pretty much,
if I understand it correctly, we've pretty much
plateaued in the amount of, at least
intelligence, possibly consciousness, that we can have.
I hope that's not the case, but it could be.
[Interviewer] In terms of the amount of consciousness?
Well, if our consciousness is a microcosm
of the whole universe, the good news is that
we're connected to the whole universe.
The bad news is that we may, in a few eons ahead,
they may not keep getting more
and more conscious, but maybe that's not a bad thing.
[Interviewer] Is there some space in there, somewhere,
I don't mean that literally, but figuratively,
is there space in this concept to look
at the notion of super position in terms of
actual dimensional, having dimensional values,
of maybe existing in two dimensions at one time.
Or two, or three, or four, or ten dimensions.
Where does multidimensionality play into all this?
Well, it depends on your interpretation of the
problem of collapse in the wave functions.
If you believe in multiple worlds, then
every super position branches off
and forms a new universe.
So, and that would presumably include your consciousness,
so the, your consciousness that was gonna
ask me a different question, is already in a different
universe, where I'm trying to answer it.
But in this universe, you asked me
the question that you did, and we're discuss that.
Now, and some people believe that.
I don't follow that, because in the Penrose view,
the super positions are unstable and will self collapse.
So, because of that you chose to ask the question
that you did, and the other possibility
just kinda died away, you know,
just the road not taken.
You know I hear a lot of people talking
about other dimensions and higher dimensions.
I don't think you need that.
I think if you want to look for
deepness, and profound interconnection,
and spirituality, it's in our universe,
just at a different scale.
It's at this fundamental scale.
It's all the way down.
Now, you might say, well, why would it,
you know, spirituality it must be, you know, big, right?
Well, the small scale is everywhere.
Where ever you go, there it is.
And not only that, it's as far as we can tell holographic.
So that, you know, or fractal, even.
So that big concepts exist at very sub sub
microscobic concepts, so I would put
spirituality not in another dimension,
but at the, the fundamental level
of our single, one and only dimension.
Or four dimensions.
[Interviewer] And also from, from some of what
you've said before, it's not as though we have
to go to other dimensions to find incredible
possibilities in life as we understand it now.
Um, so would you say is happening is going to lead us
into a greater understand of, for example, of teleportation.
What's that all about? I mean, everybody's
seen those shows.
Beam me up , Scotty.
Well, they've actually done that now, with single particles.
And, ah, it's used in, it destroys the one over here,
but it recreates it over there.
[Interviewer] So how can that functionally work?
Is there a potential in the future that human beings
or other matter, will be consciously teleported,
or can consciously teleport itself,
or does this come from an outside intention?
Can you just talk about teleportation potentials a bit?
Well, as I said, right now they
can do individual particles, like atoms
and electron states, and so forth.
It is unclear what would happen if you,
if you teleported consciousness.
Okay, I can see, you know the physical body,
but when you teleport con--
it's unclear whether the person created over there
would be the same you as was over here.
I don't know--
[Interviewer] Physically, it could be?
Physically, it could be, but would it be
the same consciousness?
And, I don't know, on the other hand you could say
well, we're not really the same, totally the same
conscious from day to day, although we pretty much are.
I don't think that's answerable yet.
It's unclear whether, um, there's a problem
called a no cloning theorem, that says you can't
make exact copies and, ah,
[Interviewer] Is that because the conscious permeating
the copy is not the same, is what you're saying?
Or does it have something to do with the mind,
the greater mind that might be permeation that cloned copy
is not the same, thus it's not the same?
I can't even hazard a guess.
I did see an article about consciousness and teleportation
on website called The Daily Grail, the other day.
They actually interviewed me, and I noticed
in looking at their website they had an article,
Can Consciousness be Teleported?
But I don't know what it says, I haven't read it yet.
But I will.
[Interviewer] In other words, you don't
have your answer just yet?
No, I don't.
[Interviewer] Another thing we might be
looking at in the future is quantum computers.
You made a quick reference to that earlier.
What does the world of computing look like?
How would that affect our world,
how close, and where are we on that exploration?
Well, we currently have a quantum cryptography
in commercial use, and that's used to send
information, with absolute secrecy.
Because it's like teleportation,
you destroy a copy, you send it over here,
and if anybody eaves drops, you can tell,
there's a way to tell.
So, it's, obviously the government
and the military and banking code people
are very interested in that, and it's
actually in commercial use.
[Interviewer] This is based on the notion of
super position?
And entanglement, right.
That you, ah, the, basically, basically
the EPR experiment, which goes back,
Einstein, Podlsky and Rosen, posed a
thought experiment in the 1930's,
that was intended to disprove the possibility
that it eventually proved.
And the thought experiment was basically
if you have, say, two electrons,
if one is spin up the other
has to be spin down and vice versa.
They're like little magnets.
You can, now one of the electrons can be
in super position of both up and down,
and this one's both up and down, okay?
But they're still entangled.
You send one super position, you know,
50 miles this way, and the other super position
electron 50 miles this way.
Then over here you make a measurement,
and it collapses to up, then 100 miles away this one
has to be down, or it is down, and that was
the prediction.
And, not only that, it would be instantaneous,
and Einstein said, that's impossible,
because nothing travels faster than the speed of light,
according to special relativity.
Well, in the 1980's the experiment was done,
and sure enough, instantaneous entanglement.
And, it's been done many, many times since then.
It's the basis of quantum teleportation,
and quantum cryptography and quantum computing.
And larger, their now doing it with photons
through fiber-optic cables off of satellites
through the atmosphere and it works.
[Interviewer] Can you give us some tangible examples
of how this is being utilized in the real world, here,
the third dimensional, everyday world?
Um, to transmit information with absolute
secrecy and privacy in quantum cryptography,
that's what it's called.
Because if the code is broken, somebody eaves dropped
it would alter the information, and, it could be detected.
[Interviewer] Primarily military uses at this point in time?
Ah, probably, yeah.
[Interviewer] How can you see quantum computing,
perhaps, in the next step beyond this,
toward a more popular type of use?
Well, that's hard to say.
First they have to overcome the problem of decoherence
because the quantum super positions seem to be
very sensitive to environmental interaction.
That's the other, ah, potential solution to
the problem of collapse of the wave function.
Super position gets eroded by interacting
with the environment and decoheres,
it loses it's coherence, so you've been asking
about coherence and the idea is that the
quantum state is incoherence, super position
is coherence, but it loses that when it
interacts with the classical environment.
So to avoid that the quantum computers
have to be built at extremely cold
temperatures and isolated.
And, by the way, that is used as an argument
against the idea that quantum consciousness,
quantum computation occurs in the brain.
That's another story, which, if you want,
I can try to explain, but um, quantum computers,
if they can solve the problem of decoherence,
have been show to exponentially faster, solve,
factor large numbers into primes,
which doesn't sound very exciting,
except that's the basis for all codes.
So again, military, financial, security is
an immediate application.
But they can also do exponentially faster searches.
Now, Google's good, but quantum Google
would be a lot better, apparently.
And, the question for me is,
well one question is
would they be conscious, because we're arguing
that quantum computing occurs in the brain.
No, I don't think so because in
technological quantum computers, the reduction
occurs by somebody basically observing.
Opening the box and looking, and that
causes measurement or decoherence,
which brings in some randomness, okay.
But, you get around the randomness by
doing the same computation many times and averaging it out.
So, that doesn't spoil the benefit, but
in consciousness, according to the Penrose approach,
that I've followed him with, the collapse
has to be a self collapse, because it has to
reach this threshold so that it's is a process
occurring in the fundamental level of space time geometry
which is where the, not only the Platonic values,
but the precursors of conscious experience,
which are called qualia.
Now, that's the other thing I didn't mention,
we also think are embedded at the fundamental level.
You could ask, how is consciousness produced,
and there's basically two answers.
One is that the brain does computation
and that at high level of complex computations
consciousness emerges, kinda like a weather pattern
emerges form complex interactions
among simple gas and dust molecules,
or a candle flame emerges, or self organizing
computer programs emerge.
Some novel property emerging at a critical level
of complexity in a higher archal system.
And that's the preline view.
[Interviewer] What's the other view?
The other view would be our view,
that it's a quantum computation.
That to go from nonconscious to subconscious
to consciousness involves a collapse,
a particular type of collapse.
that involves this self collapse,
because the qualia, the experience,
rather than being high order emergent phenomena
are actually irreducible fundamental
components of the universe.
That at it's basic level the universe has
the precursors of what philosophers call qualia,
or the components of conscious experience.
So, blueness, redness, the smell if a rose,
things like that are examples of qualia
that may be embedded at the fundamental level.
Now--
[Interviewer] This is more back to
the Platonian explanation?
Yeah, but in addition to the Platonic values,
the actual ingredients that go into
the conscious experience, why we have feelings
and emotions, are actually built into the universe.
And the fact that our, the experience we have is complex,
is kinda like, I liken it to a painter with a palate
of primitive fundamental colors, a dab of this,
a dab of that, and you have the Mona Lisa, or something.
The brain comes on and takes a dab of redness,
a dab of melancholy, a dab of this, a dab of that,
and puts togeather complex feelings
and conscious experience at any one moment.
[Interviewer] And again, what is the, what is
driving that experience, what is driving one person
to be able to barely paint and daisy and
the other one to paint a Mona Lisa?
Well--
[Interviewer] Given this is the same palate?
Um, nature and nurture.
It's like your all your upbringing, there may be
genetic proclivities, there may be, how you were raised.
There are all kinds of mundane, well not mundane,
but not necessarily quantum or fundamental,
things that go into how our brains work.
And training, and this and that, and
I'm not musical, I would like to be,
but other people are because genes
and how they were raised and their ears,
and what have you.
So, it's all, it's a combination of things.
[Interviewer] Going back to quantum coherence
and mind, and, I think, there's still a lot
of mystery, isn't there, in the world of medicine,
as to how the mind actually can function?
Where does quantum coherence occur in the brain,
I think that's what your asking?
[Interviewer] Yes.
Well, I would say microtubules.
[Interviewer] Can you explain microtubules, just a bit?
In the simplest terms, and I know none
of this is simple, what I'm asking a lot of you here.
Let me just tell it historically.
When I was in medical school, I did a reseach elective
in a cancer lab, and I was looking a cells dividing.
And how the chromosomes are pulled apart
to form daughter cells.
And if they're not pulled apart precisely
in a mirror image. exactly equally,
you can have malignancy, you can have cancer.
So this has to be a very precise,
choreographed ballet, if you will.
And the structures that did this pulling apart
were called mitotic spindles, and they
were actually structures called microtubules.
And it turns out that the same microtubles
made up the skeleton of nerve cells.
And actually, that was only discovered in the 70's.
So, if you look inside nerve cells, just if you
look inside our bodies, you see bones, okay, the skeleton.
But the microtubles are not only structural support,
but they're also the nervous system of the cell.
They organize things, they specially and temporally
organize things, they transport things, they seem
to be the--
[Interviewer] On-board computers?
The on-board computers of the cell, exactly.
And they're structure is like a hallow ear of corn, okay,
with little kernels and the kernels actually
can be like little bit states, if you will.
And they are in a very interesting geometry,
and the bits states, kernels, they actually
look like peanuts, because they change shape,
can communicate with their neighbors and
they can process information in what's called
cellular automata function.
So, basically, you have this, another level
of information processing within each cell.
Now, most views of the brain are that the brain is
100 billion nerve cells, where the nerve cells are
the fundamental units, talking to other fundamental units.
But each nerve cell is far more than a fundamental unit.
Each nerve cell is incredibly complicated.
If you think of a cell like a paramecia, you know,
like a little protozoa, it swims around, it bumps into
something moves away, it swims over here, finds food,
it avoids predators, it finds a mate, it has sex,
it doesn't have any synapses, it's one cell.
It uses it's microtubles inside it's skeleton
as information processing to do all these things.
So, I got on to the idea in the late 70's
and throughout the 80's, that microtubles,
inside neurons were processing information
necessary for consciousness and that
if you went down just to the level
of neurons and synapses,
that wouldn't do it, you had to
go down to the level of micrtotubles.
And that increased the information capacity
of the brain enormously.
And this displeased A..I people
because they were trying emulate, to build
computers equal to the brain based on neurons being
the fundamental units.
But, in any case, somebody once said to me,
well, okay, say you're right, each neuron
is like a whole little brain, how is that
going to explain feelings and emotions and so forth.
And I had to admit that they were right.
I didn't really have a good answer for that.
And that's when I read Roger's book about
quantum computing and I thought he might
have the mechanism, but I had the structure.
That microtubles were the quantum computing devices,
and that quantum coherence among the microtubles
throughout neurons in the brain
were necessary for consciousness.
[Interviewer] And consciousness is,
folded into consciousness is feeling, etcetera?
Feelings would be, yeah when the quantum computations
access the fundamental level, where they,
where the protoconscious qualia are,
that's where the feelings come in.
Because otherwise, it's just computations.
I think to account for feelings, and qualia,
emotions you have to go down to that fundamental level.
[Interviewer] So how does What the Bleep, the movie that
I think an awful lot of people will recognize
you from that movie and it's doing astoundingly well.
I think it's setting the stage for a lot of consciousness
based movies in the future.
That took a very basic story of self image, emotions
and self image into account.
From your perspective, what is the practical
application to having some understanding of
quantum theory or the quantum world?
What does it mean in everyday term for us?
Well, it's funny, everybody gets something different
out of that movie--
[Interviewer] What did you get out of the movie,
first of all?
What did you think it was saying
after you saw all of you put together, a collage of sorts?
I was, I thought, they started out
talking about quantum physics and then digressed
into other stuff, which was interesting.
But they didn't really develop the quantum business, fully.
They mentioned it, and they talked about it,
and, ah, but, I think otherwise it would have
been too much for people to handle.
So instead, they brought in all these other things.
But one of the things about quantum physics,
according to Copenhagen interpretation
is that you create reality, you create your reality.
Joe Dispenza talking about waking up in the morning
and planning your day, that's another level.
So it's kinda a higher level.
The power of positive thinking is the same thing.
That just thinking can create reality.
So I think that was at least one
of the take home messages in the film,
But as far as how I could, this came up in the talk today,
and, ah, what did I say?
[Interviewer] You said there were basically three things--
Three things.
[Interviewer] that come out of this.
One was, because I think the microtubles
are the key to consciousness, is take care of your tubules.
[Interviewer] How do we take care of our tubules?
Well, Alzheimer's disease is basically
a disease of microtubules.
They're call neurofibular entangles in neurons,
cause Alzheimer's disease.
There's no specific way, other than the usual things,
good diet, exercise, nutrition, that sort of thing.
So that's kind of a no brainer.
[Interviewer] Fundamental
Yeah.
The other one was live in moment.
[Interviewer] Why is that?
Cause, in this view, consciousness
is a sequence of events.
Each one is now.
Much like the philosopher, Alfred North Whitehead
who said consciousness is a sequence of occasions
of experience occurring in a wider field
of protoconscious experience.
We're saying the same thing.
The sequence of quantum state reductions
occurring in a protoconscious,fundamental,
Planck scale level.
But all that exists is the now.
[interviewer] To make the now count.
To make in conscious?
Enjoy the moment, yeah.
And don't obsess about the past or the future.
I made that mistake, just worry so much about
things that happened or things that could happen
or will or won't happen that I just forget
that hey, I should be having a good time right now.
[Interviewer] So, live in the now,
take care of your microtubules, live in the now.
What's number three?
Oh, be, allow yourself to be
influenced by the Platonic influences,
the Platonic information.
Whether you wanna call it subtle energies,
or whatever you want to call it.
[Interviewer] Guiding intelligence?
The way of Doa, may the force be with you,
devine intervention, whatever you want to call it.
I think that it has a physical basis,
in the fundamental level of the universe.
But if you're so focused on one particular goal,
and operate purely algorithmically,
without pausing and being mindful and reflective,
and allowing intuition or instinct to come into play,
you'll miss out on a lot of the potential
guiding influences, if you will.
[Interviewer] That was beautiful.
One last question, I know you have
to go back to Tuscon in a bit here.
How does the state, going back to where we started.
How does the dream state play into all of this?
I've read on numerous occasions,
people throughout history that have made their
big breakthroughs and have this
come to them in a dream state.
Right, I mentioned in the talk today
that Kekule discovered the structure Benzene in a dream.
I think that dreams and other manifestations
of the subconscious, including what comes out
in art and artistic expression and so forth,
are more in the quantum world.
And the consciousness is the conversion
of the quantum world into the classical world.
It exists on the edge.
I think the amount of information in the quantum world,
and the logic in the quantum world, which is very much
like quantum logic, by the way, is vast.
And that if we can avail ourselves to that we can
be more wise and have great insight.
You know, certain altered states, I think,
actually push the boundary one way or another.
And there are old studies, for example, that psychedelic
drugs promote quantum states in their receptors.
So that in the psychedelic experience it may be that
the brain is more in a, the mind is more in a
quantum state, more in a dream-like state,
which includes multiple coexisting possibilities,
deep inner connections, timelessness, all of which
are characteristics of the quantum world.
[Interviewer] The physical world may appear different,
the colors may appear differently, for example.
All of that, your saying, all of these senses
are expanded beyond?
Yeah, there's that and there is also
the fact that you're having more conscious moments
per time, per clock time, and they're of greater intensity.
So your having more conscious moments,
they're greater intensity but your more
in the quantum subonscious,
which has, kind of a treasure trove of
information and it's arranged differently.
As I said, deep inner connection,
multiple coexisting possibilities.
A psychologist named Ignacio Matte Blanco
analyzed the logic of dreams, actually in the 70's,
and the logic that he found in the 30 years of study,
the logic that came out of people's dreams
is very much like the logic we see in quantum theory.
So, um, I think the subconscious is
in the quantum world, and the
transition from the quantum world to
the classical world is consciousness, which is very
much like something in the Kabbalah.
And the Kabbalah talks about two worlds,
a one percent world of kinda, aggravation,
and a 99 percent world of wisdom and light.
Now you'd think it should be the other way around.
The 99, if I'm likening the wisdom and light
to the quantum world, and the one percent world
to the classical world, which is larger.
but the amount of information is so vast,
I think the 99 percent world is the world of
wisdom and light and the Kabbalah says
that the consciousness dances on the edge
of the two worlds and I think that fits perfectly
with the--
[Interviewer] Ancient wisdom coming
around into basically being scientifically validated today.
I hope they will be scientifically validated,
cause that's a very nice thought.
[Interviewer] Sounds like you're doing your part.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Once you've watched this interview,
you'll want to see Vernon Wolf.
At a recent What the Bleep conference,
the physist, Dr. Fred Wolf told the attendees
that if you want to know how to put all this What the Bleep
information into motion, go see Vernon.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(music)